Date: 2/15/1899
To: President William McKinley
From: Ahnaf Talukder
Re: Moral and political objection to the annexation of the Philippines

The matter of the Philippines is in the hands of the United States. Although the economic prospects of the Orient are tempting, the acquisition of the Philippines and other faraway territories is harmful to the Founding Principles, and to the integrity of American Democracy and Protestantism. How will our Constitution affect the Philippines? Will they be deemed equal or will we treat them as we were treated under Great Britain? Is forcing the American system just? All these critical questions are inseparable from any imperialistic tendencies. However, the only way to avoid these moral and political vexations is to leave the question of governance to the Filipinos themselves. Therefore, I propose that we build a navy base on the archipelago with the agreement of the Filipinos, which I believe is far more advantageous because America can tap into the Chinese markets and have a safe passage for its fleets without having to govern a nation—completely different in their religion and culture—hundreds of miles away. 

 	The Filipino guerilla soldiers have proven that they are hostile to colonization. Not only is this damaging to America’s image of hope and liberty, but it also comes at the detriment of our missionary efforts. The majority of Protestant missionaries in the Philippines have expressed that if the government starts enforcing their influence, the Filipinos will start associating Protestantism with American Imperialism, something they loathe. It will put the lives of the missionaries in danger, thus making it harder for us to spread to word of God. Furthermore, I would like to object to the morality of this unnecessary conflict. As Rev. F.W Farrar said, “War is but the collective form of the age-long, unceasing conflict of the human race against the usurpations of tyrannous evil”. Although the Reverend uses this very statement to justify Imperialism, it does the exact opposite. The tyrannous evil being the giant colonial powers like Great Britain and France. Or in the case of the Philipines, the United States of America. We can’t stand for democracy and act out of selflessness while also denying a nation its right to freedom. This contradicts the Jeffersonian philosophy of America’s expansion and the very pillars of the Constitution. As a matter of fact, the Constitution is incompatible with Imperialism, and any step towards it will drastically change the spirit of the country as we know it. 

The forced annexation of the Philippines will not only smear the U.S’s image with the blood of the innocent, but it will also bring about long-term political changes that have the possibility to stray away from the Constitution. As Americans, we have the responsibility from God to act out of love and bring them to civilization. However, it will not be accomplished through brute force. As a result, I advise you to think over your decision and consider a more peaceful approach: to build a navy base with the alliance of the Filipinos. 

